PROCEDURE

1. The case originated in an application (no. 30813/14) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr K.J. (“the applicant”), on 12 April 2014.

2. The applicant was represented by Mr G. Thuan Dit Dieudonné, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

3. The applicant alleged mainly that the refusal of the Polish family court to order the return of his child in application of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, constituted a violation of his right for respect of his family life and a breach of Article 8 of the Convention.

4. On 15 September 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.

THE FACTS

I. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE

A. Background

5. The applicant was born in 1978. He is Polish and lives in Kent, the United Kingdom. He is married to M.J., who is also Polish. In 2005 the couple moved to the United Kingdom. Their daughter was born there in January 2010. Parental responsibility was exercised jointly by both parents.

B. Child retention and proceedings under the Hague Convention

6. On 17 July 2012 M.J. and the child went to Poland on holiday, with the applicant’s consent. On 9 September 2012 M.J. informed the applicant that she was not coming back to the United Kingdom with the child.

7. On 21 September 2012 the applicant applied to the United Kingdom Central Authority for a return order for the child under the Hague Convention.

8. It appears that in mid-October 2012 the application was registered with the Grudziądz District Court. Judge D.K. was assigned to preside over the case.

9. In response to the applicant’s request, M.J. submitted that in 2011 she and her husband had become distant from each other; the applicant had lost interest in his family and had been spending his spare time playing computer games. For those reasons, and also out of fear that the child would never again be allowed to leave the United Kingdom, M.J. did not agree to her daughter’s returning to the United Kingdom alone and informed the domestic court that she did not wish to go back there with the child.

10. The first hearing was held on 19 December 2012 before the Grudziądz District Court, with Judge D.K. presiding. The applicant and his lawyer attended the hearing.

11. The second hearing was held on 4 February 2013 before the same judge. The applicant and his lawyer attended the hearing. The domestic court heard two witnesses and ordered a report of experts in psychology from the Family Consultation Centre (Rodzinny Ośrodek Diagnostyczno Konsultacyjny “RODK”).

12. On 22 March 2013 the experts examined the applicant, M.J. and the child, who was three years old at the time. The report was issued on 17 April 2013.

13. The third hearing was held on 8 May 2013 before Judge D.K. At this hearing, the Grudziądz District Court decided to dismiss the applicant’s request for the child’s return (III Nsm 999/12).

14. The first-instance court ruled on the basis of the following evidence: testimony of the applicant, M.J. and the members of both families and the RODK experts’ report.

15. The RODK experts were ordered to make the following assessment:

“whether moving [the child] into her father’s care, linked with her separation from the mother, would disturb [the child’s] sense of security and would affect her emotional state in a negative way; or is it recommended, [with a view to] the adequate psycho-physical development of the child, to [put the child under the father’s care] linked with [giving] an order to surrender the child by the mother.”

16. The experts concluded that “the child’s return to the United Kingdom and her separation from the mother”, her primary caregiver, “would cause more emotional harm to the child than the lack of daily contact with her father.” In particular, the child’s sense of security and stability could be disturbed. To this effect the report read as follows: “Considering the [young] age and the sex of the child, it must be stated that the mother is currently best suited to satisfy her daughter’s needs.”

The experts also noted that the child was emotionally attached to both parents; she was developing well; perceived Poland and the United Kingdom on an equal footing; spoke Polish and had adapted well to her new life in Poland. It was recommended that the child should stay with her mother in Poland and have regular contact with her father.

17. The first-instance court considered that the RODK’s report was thorough, clear and of a high evidentiary value.

18. On the merits, the Grudziądz District Court considered that it was called to examine “the relationship between the child and [each of] the parents, her physical and psychological development and also, any [possible] physical or psychological harm [which could occur] in the event of the child’s return to her father without the mother.”

19. The domestic court attached importance to the young age of the child (who was three years and four months old at the time of the ruling) and the fact that the mother had always been the child’s primary caregiver. The reasons for the mother’s refusal to return to the United Kingdom together with the child were not discussed by the domestic court. The district court held, relying on the experts’ report, that there was a grave risk of psychological harm if she were to return to the United Kingdom without her mother. It was noted that Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention protected abducted children to such a great extent that it did not allow for their return if that was going to place them in a “disadvantageous situation” (w niekorzystnej sytuacji).

20. The applicant appealed, arguing among others the following points of fact and law: the first-instance court ruled in breach of Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention, firstly in that they concluded that in the circumstances of the case there was a grave risk that the child’s return to the United Kingdom would expose her to intolerable psychological harm and would place her in a disadvantageous situation, and secondly in that they wrongly assumed that the child would have to be separated from the mother even though the latter had not cited any objective obstacles to her returning to the United Kingdom; the first-instance court ruled in breach of Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its general directive that the best interest of the child be protected; the facts as established by the domestic court contradicted the evidence produced in the course of the proceedings; the court’s conclusion that the child’s return would expose her to intolerable psychological harm contradicted the findings of the expert report; and the court should not have refused to adjourn the hearing at which the applicant was not represented by a lawyer.

21. At the appellate hearing, the applicant also argued (6) that the experts in psychology who had drafted the RODK’s report for the first‑instance court were incompetent.

22. On 14 October 2013 the Toruń Regional Court dismissed the appeal (IV Ca 1865/12).

23. The appellate court fully relied on the findings of fact made by the first-instance court, and held that the child’s return to the United Kingdom with or without the mother would place her in an intolerable situation (“w sytuacji nie do zniesienia”). Firstly, in view of the child’s very young age and the fact that since the retention the child had been under her mother’s care practically round the clock and that her contact with the applicant had been rare, the child’s separation from her mother would cause negative and irreversible consequences. Secondly, the child’s return with her mother would not have a positive impact on the child’s development either. To this effect, it was noted that M.J. had never adapted to her life in the United Kingdom; she was in conflict with the applicant and her departure from Poland would be against her will and forced by the circumstances.

24. As to the remaining grounds of the applicant’s appeal, the regional court ruled in the following manner: contrary to the applicant’s impression, the RODK’s report was clear and adamant in its conclusion that the child’s best interest would be better served if she were allowed to stay in Poland with her mother; in view of the fact that the applicant’s lawyer had gone on holiday and the applicant had not agreed to be represented by a substitute lawyer, granting his motion for adjournment was not justified; and the argument about the incompetence of the RODK’s experts was, firstly, belated (the applicant had not raised that issue before the first-instance court or in his appeal) and, secondly, inconsistent with the applicant’s reliance on the impugned report in support of his remaining arguments.

C. The applicant’s contact with the child, divorce application and recent developments

25. At the first hearing, held on 19 December 2012 by the Grudziądz District Court, the applicant’s lawyer applied, expressly citing Article 21 of the Hague Convention, for arrangements for organising and securing the effective exercise of the applicant’s right of contact during the Hague Convention proceedings.

26. The domestic court did not rule on that application.

27. On 28 December 2012 the applicant applied to the Grudziądz District Court for a contact order in respect of the child. He did not rely on Article 21 of the Hague Convention. He asked, inter alia, for an interim order to be issued obliging M.J. for the duration of the Hague Convention proceedings to allow him to take the child to his house every second and fourth weekend of the month from 3 p.m. on Friday until 8 p.m. on Sunday, and to talk to the child by telephone or Skype every Monday, Wednesday and Friday between 4 p.m. and 7 p.m.

28. On 28 February 2013 the Grudziądz District Court, with D.K. as the presiding judge, decided under Article 445 1 § 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure to stay the proceedings concerning the applicant’s contact with the child until the end of the couple’s divorce proceedings, which had been instituted before the Toruń Regional Court on 14 January 2013 (III. R. Nsm 35/13).

29. On 25 March 2013 the divorce application lodged by M.J. (IC 117/13) was rejected by the Toruń Regional Court, with S.M. as the presiding judge accompanied by two lay judges. The regional court favoured the jurisdiction of the English courts because the last common place of residence of the couple was in Maidstone, the United Kingdom. On 24 June 2013 the Gdańsk Court of Appeal, with D.K. as the presiding judge, dismissed M.J.’s interlocutory appeal against that decision.

30. The applicant submitted that when the Hague Convention proceedings had been pending in Poland, he had seen his daughter on several occasions, in the mother’s house and in her presence.

31. On 28 November 2014 the Grudziadz District Court issued a decision on the applicant’s contact with his daughter. A copy of this decision has not been submitted to the Court. It appears that the applicant was authorised to see his daughter the second and the fourth weekend of every month; during one week of winter holidays; during two weeks of summer holidays and on selected days of Christmas and Easter holidays. It appears that the applicant did not appeal against this decision.

On 31 August 2015 the Grudziądz District Court, with D.K. as presiding judge, confirmed that the above-mentioned decision was binding and enforceable as of 8 July 2015.

32. Divorce proceedings are currently pending in the United Kingdom.